Ah.
Ah.
I would like to say a few words about my life.
When I was a child, I had a friend who was a monk.
He was a Buddhist monk.
He was a Buddhist monk.
He was a Buddhist monk.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
The problem is that I cannot translate myself.
I say something in Tibetan, when I try to translate, it doesn't work.
Something different comes out.
So I don't know how to translate myself.
The program yesterday was supposed to be an introduction to Buddhism, but yesterday I gave a brief instruction on the seven-line prayer, Guru Rinpoche's seven-line prayer.
And today I thought, since it's Saturday and many of the younger generation, Himalayan Tibetans are here, so I'll try my best
to give a little bit of an introduction to the general Buddhism.
So I changed the program.
Not that I have so much to say, but I just ...
I am very fortunate to be with the Grand Master since I was very young.
I get to travel around the world, see the changes, see so many different things.
So I have some ideas and some thoughts that I would like to share with you.
our younger generation, Himalayan Tibetans, as well as some of you.
Something useful, then it's good.
If not, just enjoy, enjoy, sit and enjoy, enjoy the show.
So most of the younger generation, Himalayan and Tibetan, they understand English.
So today I will try to speak more in English.
Then I will try to translate myself into Tibetan afterwards.
Recently, I was in New York.
A lot of Himalayan people have now moved to New York, and many of them were born in America and grew up in America.
One of my nephews,
He was born in America.
He went to school and grew up in America.
And recently he visited Tibet, Lhasa and all the places.
So, out of curiosity, I told him,
If you were to ask a question after visiting Tibet, what would you ask?
He is a young Himalayan teenage boy.
They have this funny kind of accent.
I don't know if it's all the Himalayan, Tibetan or all American, I don't know.
A little bit funny accent.
But I would ask a question.
It doesn't work very well when it's so loud.
I can imitate better without the microphone.
Anyway, the question was...
Why didn't we industrialize, industrialize, industrialize?
Huh?
Industrialize.
Industrialize in Tibet.
That was the question.
Because in the West, if you look and travel around, you see so many from a few hundred years, we have all these factories building so many
what you call machines.
Recently, I went to Niagara Falls.
I saw the museum of Nikola Tesla, how the electricity was invented.
I saw all those things.
Interesting question from a young Tibetan who was sort of born in America, brought up, goes back to Tibet, and sees that, oh, there's no industry, never developed.
So my answer is, it doesn't mean that we are kind of backward.
We didn't focus outward industry.
Outward development.
We focus more towards inward development.
I think, I don't know the timing exactly, but when in the West, when they are building, creating electricity, and I don't know, trying to fly, all those things, around the same time, Longchen Ramjam in Tibet, writing the Seven Treasures,
how to develop inner peace.
So the focus went two different way.
You end up with aeroplane and cars, we end up with the precious practice, how to practice Dharma, how to overcome your negative emotions.
So this is two ways we went.
And now it sort of comes together.
Llamas can take the aeroplane, come here and give the teaching.
So actually it worked out quite well.
But anyway, no matter how much you have outer development, as many of you now realize, and many of you live in the West, grew up in the West, you see,
then no matter how much outer development, it doesn't really give you total inner peace or fullest satisfaction of life.
Recently I was in Nepal, up in the Himalaya, in a place called Manang.
Some people call it Nishang, Manang.
It is very near to Tibet, very similar to an environment like Tibet.
The place where Milarepa meditated, the place where Milarepa met the hunter, the famous story.
The road was terrible.
You can hardly call it a road.
It was a really scary, scary road.
Even though the journey was a little bit tough, but once I reached there, it was so beautiful, just in front of the Annapurna mountain, very peaceful.
And now there is electricity and some basic necessities are there, but still people live very, very simple life.
And just below the Melarepa cave, there was a small hermitage.
And there was one Kempo doing retreat.
I believe he's from Jigong Gaji tradition.
And I asked how long he's been there.
For six years, he's been doing retreat.
And I believe he chose to sit there and meditate.
Very minimum, basic kind of necessity.
There is electricity, and a very, very basic necessity.
But very happy, very happy, very content life.
Then I compare.
New York, you have this skyscraper.
I'm not going to tell who, but someone with a golden toilet, golden sink where he can wash his face.
24 hours angry, tweeting angry notes.
I'm sure you can guess who he is.
I'm not going to mention name because I have to go back someday.
I might not get visa.
See the comparison.
The guy in the Himalaya choose to live in a very simple basicness city, very happy.
and continues to practice.
Similar in one of these towers, Italian furniture, golden toilet, 24 hours angry, not happy.
So therefore, I think what our great kings, like Khenlop Chuesom, King Thissong Dejan, Guru Rinpoche, Khenchen Bodhisattva, invited lots of scholars, translated Dharma texts into Tibet around 7th, 8th century.
It was a kind of national project of Tibet to bring the Dharma and translate.
I think when you look around in the world these days, people talk about, I don't know, 20% of the income is invested in weapons,
and military but during that time tibet they are not looking really looking for interest to the development they are trying to bring the authentic teachings from india national treasure a national budget i think we can say it was spent on bringing dharma into tibet and translating
And not only that, from that time till our masters, and of course His Holiness, which is still alive, till our great masters, they managed to preserve that.
It is said that maybe around 10 to 20% of the Tibetan population are monks and nuns practicing.
So,
you get good results.
Out of the whole country, 20% of the population practice trying to achieve some kind of inner development, inner realization.
Then you get those great masters.
From the 7th century till our time, we focus not on outer development, not focusing on outer industrialization, but inner development.
How to overcome negative emotions?
how to achieve an awakened state of mind, enlightenment.
So like that.
So that's the answer I gave to him.
I think our younger generations should realize that we are not sort of ...
Even though we don't have that much outer development, we don't have that much skyscrapers, but we have many, many realized masters
And many of them, around 1959, the situation in Tibet, they flee Tibet, came out and then spread the Dharma, Buddha Dharma.
And then, I think,
Many of our younger generation, sometimes people ask, Oh, what are you?
And they say, Oh, I'm Buddhist.
I'm born to a Buddhist family, so I'm Buddhist.
So this, I want to tell you that you cannot be born as a Buddhist.
It does not exist in Buddhism.
You become Buddhist.
by understanding what the Buddha's teaching is.
I believe that if you're Jewish, if your mother is a Jew, then you become a Jew.
Similarly, Hindus, if your father is a Hindu, you become a Hindu.
But I was wondering, if your father is Hindu and mother is Jew, you are in big trouble.
That's a joke.
Anyway, we don't have that kind of system.
So you cannot, just because you are born to a Buddhist father and Buddhist mother, you become Buddhist.
In the teachings, when they talk about precious human life, we always make an aspiration, may I reborn next life to parents who practice dharma, and may I be able to enter into dharma.
So you have to enter into dharma.
Just by birth, you don't really become Buddhist.
Then similarly,
To become Buddhist, I think you have to understand what Buddha is teaching.
And in order to do that, quite often we emphasize so much on culture and tradition.
it is like which holds the teaching.
Or if you look at many of our traditions and cultures, it is somehow connected with, most of the time, it is connected with the Buddhism or teaching of Buddha.
even like Tibetan song, dance, Himalayan song and dance, the old traditional song and dance, it's all something about praising the Buddha or praising Guru Rinpoche.
So somehow it's connected.
So therefore...
we emphasize especially the younger generation to pay more attention towards our own culture and tradition especially i think the language are very important
We talk about not being able to preserve our culture and language in a place where there is no freedom.
We always complain.
But what about those of us who live in a place where there is freedom?
Then I think we should not forget how important it is.
because it's not just culture and tradition.
I think it holds a lot of very important information.
Just by wearing Tibetan dress or just by wearing Himalayan, Bhutanese dress does not make you a genuine kind of holder of the culture and tradition.
I think the outer appearance is just a symbol.
The inner Buddhist value
If it is not there, then I think outer dress is just like a show.
So therefore, of course, it is nice to see the outer dress, traditional dress, costumes, but more importantly, the one who is wearing these costumes must uphold the Buddhist value and understand what is Buddhist value.
And just if it's any culture or any language, maybe it's not that important.
In the world, I think we can say we have more than 7,000 different languages, out of which every year we are losing about 10 languages every year.
It's sad, but every language does not have that much information or material to study or read, written in language, like what you call literature.
If you look in the Tibetan literature, which is now used in all Himalaya, not only Tibet, Bhutan and all Himalaya, Tibetan literature is one of the clearly...
literature which holds the information or teaching of Buddha, among the Buddhist literature, let's say, among the Buddhist literature, classic Buddhist literature, we can easily say that the Tibetan language is number one.
Second, Chinese.
Third, Sanskrit.
Fourth, Pali.
Sixth, in Japanese.
So we had the maximum material literature written in Tibetan literature from the 7th century till now.
There were so many books and so many materials.
So it will be a pity that our next generation, future generation, younger Himalayan kids, if they don't know how to read, if they don't know how to understand, then this is a waste, so much material.
Even in the Himalayas these days,
some grandchildren the parents are busy and they leave the grandchildren with a mobile phone and youtube and the children start looking at the youtube mostly english youtubes and then they start speaking english before they can start speak native language and then grandmother don't understand what the grandchildren are saying
My grandchildren are speaking ghost language.
So this is happening.
They start speaking English before they can speak their native language.
So I think very important at home, if you try to speak Tibetan, so that the children can learn.
And of course now here there are some facilities to learn Tibetan language.
The reason why I am saying that is the information that we have in the Buddhist literature.
It is very, very useful for future generations.
Because we live in a kind of a world
very much uncertainty, uncertainty.
We don't know what's going to happen, what's coming.
We can think, think back 20 years ago, think back 20 years ago.
Did any of us imagine that everybody will be walking around with a smartphone in their pocket?
No.
When we saw the fax machine, we were amazed, wow, you can get a fax machine.
Now we are walking around with two terabytes in our pocket.
We did not predict that 20 years ago.
We have more computer memory in this than the American rocket went to the moon.
Can you imagine?
And what's going to happen in 20 years?
We don't know.
We have no clue.
Politicians have no idea, I think.
Business people, no idea.
Something going so fast towards future, not knowing where we're going.
It's almost like driving as fast as you can on a highway.
You don't know what's in front of you.
So,
How can we educate our future younger generation how to live their life in 20 years?
We don't know what's going to happen in 20 years.
But no matter if they're still alive,
No matter what kind of world, what kind of situation they live, they will always face a problem or challenge with their negative emotions.
They will always have a difficult dealing with their anger, difficult dealing with their jealousy, difficult dealing with their pride.
So if we can invest in them,
Using the Buddhist teaching, how to deal with these negative emotions when you face this situation due to negative emotions.
That is the Buddha's teaching, and that, I think, is the best investment we can put in the children's mind.
I think, of course, we have to...
send the children to school, learn mathematics, science, I don't know, geography, biography, whatever we have to.
But more importantly, I think, the development, inner development, teaching them basic, simple meditation.
slowly, slowly introduce them how to deal with negative emotions, which is the essence of the Buddha's teaching.
That is, I think, the best investment we can do to our future generation.
And that's why it is very pity that if we lose our language, our culture, culture might change, but most importantly, the teaching, the Buddha's teaching.
And also, the teaching of Buddha is not
just a kind of philosophy or idea, or is not ...
I don't think we can really say it is purely a kind of religion, believing in something.
Buddha's teaching, I think, is based on fact, based on reality.
Example, if someone is not well, if you don't feel well, then first you say, oh, I'm not feeling well.
Then second, you want to go and see a doctor because you're not feeling well.
Then you go to see a doctor.
Doctor examines you.
Oh, something is wrong with you.
Identifies the sickness.
Then gives you the prescription.
give you the diet.
So then you follow that.
If you follow that, then you will be cured from this sickness.
So that kind of whole process, I don't think we can call it a religion or neither philosophy.
Someone getting sick, first understanding I'm sick, then you don't want to be sick, you go to see a doctor, doctor give prescription, you follow the prescription, and you're free from the sickness.
So that process, we don't call it religion.
Or this process, we don't call it philosophy.
So similarly, all the Buddha's teaching from
Shravakayana all the way to Vajrayana.
It is within the framework of what we call the Four Noble Truths, which is very similar to what I have just mentioned.
First is the Dungaljit Demba, Truth of the Suffering, Truth of the Suffering in this world.
a lot of dissatisfaction in the life.
Normally, a classic example is Chega Nachi, the suffering of birth, suffering of sickness, suffering of old age, suffering of death.
So somehow, no matter who we are, whether you are powerful, rich, poor, we are within that cycle of this suffering.
What causes the suffering?
Second thing.
What causes the suffering?
We call it Kuinjungi Denpa.
The suffering has a cause.
Like example, if you are sick, the doctor will say, oh, you got sick because you eat too much chili or maybe ice cream.
So what causes the suffering?
The cause of the suffering
Desire, anger, jealousy, hatred, they are negative.
Because nobody feels very happy when they are angry.
Nobody is very happy when they are jealous.
Nobody wakes up in the morning and says, may I suffer today?
Nobody wants suffering.
So what causes the suffering, if you sort of analyze it?
Everything leads back to our own negative emotions, anger, jealousy, hatred.
Of course, among all, the ignorance, not understanding the truth, not understanding the truth of reality.
Then the third question, Gopi Denpa, can the suffering be stopped?
Can the suffering be stopped?
Yes, because the cause of the suffering is negative emotions.
It is not really inherent to the nature of oneself.
It is not inherent.
So, for example, if your cup is dirty,
The dirty is on the cup.
That doesn't mean the cup itself is dirty.
You can wash away the cup.
Similarly, the negative emotions is not inherent, is not the nature of yourself.
So there are many kind of teaching and the logic explanation behind that.
So if it is not inherited, then we can remove it.
There is a possibility to remove.
Then the fourth teaching comes, how to remove that, how to remove that suffering.
Then there comes all the Buddha's teachings, different methods, different paths,
Like Theravada tradition, they have their own method.
Mahayana tradition, another different method.
And Vajrayana, different methods.
So even though the different Buddhist schools look different from outwardly, Theravada's way they dress, how they do different, Mahayana you see different, Vajrayana you see different, but it's a different path.
to get rid of the cause of the suffering.
So these are very much based on reality, based on the fact.
Just like the example I have given, someone feeling sick, what is the cause of the sickness?
And first accepting the sickness, I think it is very important.
If you think everything is okay, everything is fine, then it doesn't sort of make you go to see a doctor or seek a solution.
So first thing, I think the samsaric world, everything is impermanent, everything is changing.
So at the end, everything brings suffering.
So then we seek for a kind of a solution.
So I think the basic Four Noble Truths, if you can understand what Buddha's teaching is.
And then one thing very clearly Buddha mentions is, analyze my teaching and don't take it for granted.
So therefore, we are, let's say, we are like authorized.
We have the right to analyze the Buddha's teaching.
And that, I think, no other faith or the religious school have this kind of message.
As far as what I know, most of the faith say, you must believe because someone says so.
Buddha never said that.
Buddha said, analyze my teaching.
Don't take it for granted.
So this is a very, very powerful.
that we should understand.
Sometimes we don't understand, we just take it for granted.
But no, I think when you look at many other schools, many other faiths, it is not like that.
So this teaching, very precious teaching of Buddha, and nowadays a lot of the
people who are not background, not born as a Buddhist, but they are getting interest.
Of course, we are not going around knocking on the people's door and trying to convert people.
But, of course, if they read, it makes sense, then people, when they come, seek the teaching.
Then it is our duty to share with them.
And one thing that His Holiness the Dalai Lama quite often and very much emphasized is Buddhism and science.
Because I think we live in kind of time where anything which is scientifically proven, then we're ready to jump in it.
You remember not so long ago, we have this COVID.
As soon as we have the vaccine saying that scientifically proven, everybody roll up their sleeve and got injection.
ready to jump in it.
So, I think if it says scientifically proven, then everybody sort of takes that as, oh, that's the truth.
More than Buddha's words, a scientist's words.
So, with seeing this, I think His Holiness quite often mentions that science, Buddhism, dialogue between science and Buddhism,
emphasizes in that.
And there have been many meetings and many kinds of, I think we can say, experiments done.
And I am also very much interested, even though I did not go to regular school to learn those things, but in 2003, the beginning of this kind of research,
I participated in some of the experiments as a guinea pig.
Not that I am a good meditator or anything, but I just wanted to explore.
And there is one thing which interests me a lot.
There is one experiment they did.
I think it was in Los Angeles in 2003.
One day they said that everybody has their kind of
Sorry?
Baseline or attitude, right?
Attitude?
Attitude, kind of attitude.
Like, some people are naturally a little bit optimistic.
I'm sure you have friends, no matter where you go, who always say, oh, it's cool.
Even if it's a funky kind of house, you say, this is cool.
I think some of the architects who built those towers must have been very positive architects.
When I saw this building on the way, I thought something is wrong.
It was all crooked.
And somebody told me, a very famous architect purposely did that.
Anyway.
If it's in Nepal, you will say, bad architect.
In Canada, you say, oh, it's a beautiful art.
Anyway, everybody has their own kind of baseline.
Some people naturally see, oh, it's cool, it's nice.
And some people naturally, wherever you go, always feel something is wrong, a little bit pessimistic.
So everybody has their own baseline.
And then there are ups and downs.
Like when you ...
When you receive, let's say, a lot of money, lottery ticket, you receive a lot of money or something, and then your baseline is here, and your happiness shoots up, goes up.
Within six months or one year, it comes down to baseline.
It doesn't stay there.
If you're always, your baseline stays there.
And then the love at first sight goes up.
Then, after six months, it comes down to the baseline.
After marriage, it goes below.
immediate family die or something terrible happen, goes down, comes back to baseline.
So they say baseline is always there.
But what they found through this research is that by contemplating on kind of meditation like loving kindness or four boundless loves, the baseline goes up.
Baseline goes up.
You become more positive, you become happier, you become more optimistic.
So this they could see in the machine.
I wasn't a good example, but even we had to go through the MRI machine, hook up to the computer.
It was 2003.
Now they have a lot more information, I'm sure.
But in those days, they already mentioned that.
So these are kind of ...
I'm sure when you do a lot of practice, maybe you feel, maybe you don't really feel, but when you put it in the machine and analyze it, when you actually can see, then it's really kind of believing.
So these are the Buddhist methods, the scientists, they do research, and they did many, many, after, I think, they have a lot of information that how the Buddhist teaching, the technique, meditation, can really make changes to our brain.
become a better person, become a happier person.
They say it's almost like the muscle, mental muscle.
When you go to the gym, you do a lot of exercise, your muscle becomes stronger.
So similarly, we train our mind to be optimistic by using the techniques, especially like Lob Chong Mind Training, For Boundless Love,
And then your mind becomes better, so you can see all those things.
So I thought that was very interesting.
Quite often I share in my Dharma talks I give, and always, always, no matter what country, what language you speak, when you say, the happiness goes below the baseline after marriage, it gives a big laugh.
So this thing is kind of real evidence
Answer to the earlier question for the young Himalayan boy is not that what our ancestors, what the previous masters, what they've been doing in the hermitage, what they've been practicing is something relevant in our world, something really can benefit not only us,
But even now we are able to share with the rest of the world and many people.
One of the conferences, a long time ago, around that time, 2003, His Holiness gave a big conference in MIT.
There were about 800 neuroscientists who participated.
So this shows that how much information, how much sort of advance the teaching
So I think this is important for our younger generation to know that how important, how much information we hold in the Tibetan texts, Tibetan languages.
So if we can, the next generation, people really have to understand their value and preserve our tradition and value.
I will just give you a small kind of basic meditation for those who are interested.
We call it something called bodhicitta.
In Tibetan, we call it chanchuji sim, bodhicitta mind, generating love and compassion, training.
There is something called four boundless love.
So first, like the His Holiness's four point mentions, everybody wish to be happy, not to be suffer.
Everybody has a right to be happy.
So therefore, with understanding that, then we developed our kind of loving kindness towards all sentient beings.
So it's just simple thinking.
Some people will say, oh, why we should care?
Why we should generate loving kindness to others?
If you think, every kind of what we call relative happiness, even relative happiness, relative kind of joy, it all depends on others.
Example, the place that we are using here, it is all built by others.
Without this, we will have to sit outside in the sun, in the rain.
So, feel grateful to others.
Similarly, the clothes we wear are made by others.
If the others did not make, what are we going to wear?
So, feel grateful to others.
Everything that we consider gives us comfort and happiness,
It's due to others.
So that's how we have to train.
Because someone might think, oh, I paid for it.
I worked, I made money, I paid for it.
But if they did not create, then we cannot buy.
Imagine yourself alone in this land, Canada.
You're alone by yourself.
Imagine without others.
So like that, thinking, appreciating others, what people have created.
So every kind of happiness, every kind of comfort, it's all due to others, the food we eat.
So this kind of gratitude we've built up.
That's how we train our mind, first step, fielding gratitude.
And then classic Tibetan kind of teaching says that all sentient beings are our mother,
Mother, the reason why we choose mother is because we have been taking nine months in the mother's womb, and after birth we are fed, we are taught how to walk, we are taught how to eat.
Without mother, we will not survive.
So thinking like that.
And then, this kindness of this mother, when you feel strong kind of compassion, then we slowly think, this is not only one lifetime.
We have many, many, many lifetimes.
Every birth, there's always a mother.
So then we sort of, a little bit, a broader mind, all sentient beings being our mother, kind parents.
So that's how we train.
Then after that, when you feel strong kind of loving-kindness, then we shift.
We can shift towards equal all sentient beings, even though in this life we feel like not friendly person or enemy.
But in past life, they must be our parents.
Tangnyom, economity.
And then we shift, focus.
on what we call Nying-Jie.
There are many beings suffering in this world
due to sickness, due to hunger, so many suffering.
We just turn on the television, everything always there's suffering.
So thinking they're also these beings who are suffering.
And one time they've been our parents, they've been our loved ones, they've been our kind of family.
And then feeling strong kind of compassion.
Slowly shift, shift this kind of mind.
When you feel a little bit down, you feel like depressed, feel a little bit like hopelessness, then we shift our focus to rejoice.
You're seeing people who has good life, people who has engaged in dharma, who has been practicing dharma, so we shift that.
And then you feel uplifted, rejoice.
And then if you sometimes, because our mind can be tricky, and it becomes like jumpy, or too much excitement, then again we shift to the equanimity.
So the four-bounded love is a beautiful teaching by Jigme Lingpa in Treasury of Spiritual Qualities.
Very beautiful method, very simple, shifting these four-bounded love.
Jamba,
Very simple, very, very helpful.
So like that, this is kind of basic training, what we call Bodhicitta or Chanjusen.
So real bodhicitta is a possibility, understanding the possibility that all sentient beings can be free from the suffering of samsara, and then wish that may all be free from the suffering of samsara.
So that is what we call the bodhicitta.
This training, I think we can do, if you want to do daily practice, very simple, very helpful.
You don't need so many objects.
Just sit quietly and contemplate this.
And this is the essence of all the teachings.
No matter what school you follow, all will, I think, speak the same.
And then post-meditation, I think we have to kind of gradually improve.
Gradually improve ourselves.
Not that we just make a prayer, offer some lamps, give some money, and then go back to normal life.
We don't try to improve ourselves gradually.
Then it doesn't really work.
I often joke about my weight.
I'm quite heavy.
I'm quite fat.
I wasn't so fat like this.
But I cannot go to a temple and light a lamp and offer some money saying, may I become thin, may I become thin, may I become thin.
Om, I'm thin soha.
Om, I'm thin soha.
It's not going to lose weight for sure.
If it's possible, I would have tried.
So of course, you make aspiration.
We have a lot of diet books.
in your shell if you don't implement them you're not going to lose weight so i have my attendant trying to control my potions in the food he's not doing a good job i'm not losing so much weight anyway you know you try to eat little bit less you try to walk little more
Then you might try to lose weight, right?
So similarly, I think to improve ourselves, to generate more loving kindness, we have to start from a small.
We just can't just small thing, we just ignore saying, oh, there's something big I'm going to do.
Then maybe it will not work.
For example, I know many of you are driving an Uber, or driving in the ... Maybe Canada is a little bit better at following rules.
Imagine New York.
Everybody is shouting at each other when they are driving.
Anybody who drives faster than you is crazy.
Anybody who drives slower than you is stupid.
So everybody has to follow your rhythm.
Or somebody goes zoom, oh, he's a crazy guy.
Somebody is slow in front, oh, stupid guy.
So I think like that.
That is kind of anger, right?
So I think try to be patient.
That's maybe a small step.
Similarly, there are many opportunities in our life where we can practice to become a better human being by not cursing the other driver.
i don't know see somebody like other day i was saying you're waiting for a bus and there are a lot of people waiting you don't have to go and kiss and hug everybody but you just sit there and mentally you wish that person be happy
Just wish.
It's very simple.
And small, small, I think in the teaching it says, The small spark of fire can burn the whole, what do you call, haste.
So similarly, when the anger or hatred or desire, when it's small, when it grows, you have to first, you have to put down.
Then the big fire will not come.
We ignore the small spark, and then by the time it's a big fire, then we cannot control.
So like that.
Of course, we make a cumulative merit, we offer lamps, we offer the water offering, but at the same time, we have to work.
Daily life, day to day, when you go to work, when you go to office,
And anything negative emotion, first recognize, and then there are so many different methods to deal with this.
From small we deal, and then when it never becomes big, and then we improve ourselves, become a better human being.
And I think facing life also becomes easier like that.
So I thought to share this with you.
And then, after this, today is the Menzushiri Empowerment from Jammai Khyentse Wombo's Circle of Teaching.
I received this many times from Chabjit Tengku Chinzirinpoche.
So today I will bestow the...
Since there are a lot of younger generation who wants to receive the mensushiri empowerment, so today I will give this mensushiri empowerment.
Thank you.
