.
.
.
.
And so this morning I will give a brief overview and explanation along with the transmission of the Supplication to the Seven Point Mind Training, Ambrosia of the Mind, the essence of the spiritual tradition coming from the great master Atisha.
I think more than 40 years ago, J. K. Rinpoche gave this teaching in Dordogne, France.
So I was very inspired by this aspiration prayer.
So since then, I try my best to do this every day in my daily prayer.
If we can implement this mind training into our daily life, then I think the essence of all the practice is in this one.
Because during meditation and post meditation,
We are like supposed to be practitioner and we face lots of challenges.
So I think if we cannot implement the teachings we receive and teachings we study when we face our challenges, then I think no matter how many teachings we receive, not so helpful.
So therefore, I think every answer to our problem is very clearly how to deal with this.
It's very clearly mentioned in Lojong practice.
Of course, I think especially nowadays,
It has always been, but nowadays especially, we face a lot of challenges, so people are looking for answers.
And I think many teachers are giving teachings based on Lojong.
So I'm sure most of the things that we will go through today, that you already heard many times.
But we always need a reminder.
So, today we will go through this.
I don't think I have anything new to offer, something new to share with you, but just to remind ourselves.
Last year, I went to Indonesia.
Sumatra Island, where the...
Dharma, selling.
Dharma kirti.
You know, after the COVID, start forgetting.
So whenever I forget, I can blame to the COVID.
So you can implement that.
It works quite well.
Oh, it's COVID, I don't remember.
So they say at one point there were like 11,000 students, almost bigger than, around 11th century, bigger than Nalanda.
So many Buddhists flourished there.
And now there's hardly any, just some ruins.
But anyway, when I went there, I met some professor who did research on this place.
So they told me something very interesting.
In the Indonesian language, when you say, thank you, they say, .
And then this professor told me, the meaning of this is, I give you my happiness and I take your suffering.
And now the Indonesia is kind of a majority Muslim country.
And people don't know, but they still use the word .
Well, it must have been this Lojong master's kind of influence, and still very strong.
.
I begin with the homage.
I bow before the spiritual guides of the supreme vehicle, the source of all that is positive in samsara and nirvana.
May the precious masters grant their blessings so that my mind is purified through the three kinds of faith.
No matter what education we go through, no matter what we may try to learn,
We always need to rely upon somebody to explain it to us, a teacher.
And this is very much the case within the practice, the implementation of the teaching of Buddha, the Dharma.
One must rely upon a fully qualified spiritual teacher.
When I was in the military, I was in the military.
I was in the military.
When I was in the military, I was in the military.
When I was in the military, I was in the military.
When relying on such a spiritual master, it is imperative that one have a sincere appreciation for the individual.
And this isn't to say what they look like.
One likes their form or the way they look or dress and so forth.
Rather, one should look beyond that into the physical, verbal and mental activity of a potential spiritual teacher.
And what one should have a sincere appreciation for is the absence of disturbing emotion and negative mental traits within their very being.
And is that what one should appreciate?
I am very happy to be able to share my story with you today.
For example, when we look around the temple here and we see the images, photographs of myriad spiritual masters, when we look at them, what we should have a sincere appreciation for, or rather what we find ourselves having a sincere appreciation for, is their qualities of experience and spiritual realization.
I tell the people, some of the friends who are connected with me, I always say, your source of inspiration should always, those who are connected with me, I always say, as your source of inspiration.
Then, thanks to now these modern technologies, we have the videos usually recently you viewed, and then we have audio recordings.
Then we have a lot of the teachings transcribed and translated into your own native language.
So we have many, many materials.
So what we need is sort of, wants to sort of inspire.
So I always say, is the main object of your source of inspiration.
And then to give you the transmissions and all those things, then I can do as a kind of, let's say,
Many teachings, they give example of teacher being like doctor, oneself being a patient, and then the teaching like a medicine prescribed by teacher.
I am the pharmacist who just passed down whatever prescription is written there.
So that way, even when I give wang, I always say, think of Chenzi Rinpoche, inseparable from Guru Rinpoche.
And then I just do that, what you call, in between, passing down the lineage.
So therefore, I always, even the wangs, recently in Bhutan, I said, your samaya is connected directly with Chenzi Rinpoche, directly with Chenzi Rinpoche.
So similarly, I think we can still use many of these Masters, even if they are physically not with us, we can always use their teachings.
And looking at their videos, so through them we get inspired by them.
So when we have
I like to say a lot of jokes.
I'm actually more of a stand-up comedian than a teacher.
In the market, when they want to sell some beauty products, then they show you a beautiful male or female photo in the product.
So when you look at that beauty figure, then you say, oh, if I use this product, I may look like he or she.
Isn't it?
So this is also inspiration.
But this is physical inspiration.
So here we are looking at the inner beauty, not the outer beauty.
So when we have these great masters, when we learn, when we study, I think it's very important to read their biographies so that we really get inspired that, oh, it's possible that we can achieve their state of mind.
.
.
.
.
.
So having this appreciation for and inspiration in the particular spiritual teacher with whom one has a particular connection, reflecting again and again upon their teachings,
then there is the conviction arises or the kind of the wish rather arises within us to accomplish a similar spiritual state and through practice then one has the conviction that that is something perfectly possible
And at the same time, we understand that if I only were to tread half of the path, then I wouldn't reach my destination.
So the interest and the desire to complete the training, complete the practice, if you will, arises deeply within one.
And this is the third type of inspiration or kind of trust that is irreversible.
So since we are in the West, culturally, or your culture, not really born in Buddhist environment,
But due to so many different reasons, circumstances, that you all sort of became into this path, the Buddhist path.
So each and everyone has a different reason to join in this path.
due to some kind of emotional problem or sometimes some friend's recommendation or sometimes some of you are sort of inspired, generally inspired by Himalayan kind of culture or Himalayan kind of thing.
So, due to many different reasons that you gather here.
But now, to really become a real good kind of a practitioner or properly join into this path, then we must have a sense of renunciation in the mind.
So that, even though that's not the first case you came here, but we can develop that to become a proper practitioner.
So therefore, renunciation is very important.
So in order to get that, then here are the words, here it says,
Thank you.
May the precious masters grant their blessings so that I may train thoroughly in the preliminaries, recognizing how hard it is to gain the freedoms and advantages and how easily they are lost, so that I strive always to act in accordance with the laws of karma, adopting wholesome deeds and avoiding what is harmful, and develop genuine renunciation for samsara.
So, no matter what the reason you start in the beginning, but now we have to develop this in order to become a sincere practitioner.
We must have the reason for practice is that this common sense of this precious human life, impermanence, law of cause and effect, and then sense of kind of...
Renunciation feeling, raw renunciation.
So therefore, this second verse focuses on the importance of contemplating on those aspects.
So that has to come genuine, has to come genuine, not just knowing how to count the eight this and 18 this, but genuine kind of feeling.
I must have told this story before, but they both live in the hermitage in the forest in Dzogchen Mountains.
And then Pato Rinpoche, when it's time for teaching, he would come out of his cave, and then he would call, Lungto, Lungto, and then Lungto will come somewhere from, I mean, being in Tibet, you've seen the situation, so imagine sorrow comes up.
And then they both sit on the rock, and Pato Rinpoche says, precious human life, precious human life, and then Lungto says, yeah, precious human life.
So they both cry.
And that's one day's teaching.
I heard a story like that.
So it doesn't mean you have to cry, but I think kind of genuine sense of feeling, and that is more important.
So I have teaching went on like that every day, one word, one word.
So just to get kind of deep sense of feeling into this four karhita, four thoughts of, yes, turn your mind.
The second part.
is the main part of the practice, training in bodhicitta.
May the precious Masters grant their blessings so that I may always cultivate the two aspects of bodhicitta, purifying my dualistic perceptions, which have no basis in reality, into all-pervading space, and practicing the profound exchange of my own happiness for others' suffering.
Thank you.
Here then, the first subject in this verse is that of emptiness.
Mention here is made then of a dualistic perception, dualism referring then to the object that is hankered after and the grasping mind that hankers after said object.
Here then, one is advised to purify this dualistic perception, which has no basis in reality, into all-pervading space.
.
.
.
.
.
And so here within the original tradition of the seven-point mind training we find that the emphasis in the main practice or the main part of the practice to training in bodhicitta is the emphasis on, from within the two truths, the ultimate truth.
And so we're encouraged then to reflect upon the empty nature of things as we read, purifying dualistic perception into all pervading space, to think about the empty nature of things.
And with some understanding thereof, one can then genuinely engage in the conventional truth, which is herein the equalizing and exchange of self for other.
This is the story of Tiong Tam Chan-Chu Sam.
He is the father of Tiong Tam Chan-Chu Sam.
He is the father of Tiong Tam Chan-Chu Sam.
He is the father of Tiong Tam Chan-Chu Sam.
He is the father of Tiong Tam Chan-Chu Sam.
In the past, we used to use a laptop to connect to the computer.
And so here we reflect then at the beginning on ultimate bodhicitta, on the empty nature of things.
And with some understanding of that, one can see clearly the plight of others.
And so within the experience of ultimate truth, within the empty nature of things,
one then sees how conventional truth comes to be.
Therein, one sees how others bring about their own experience of dissatisfaction, dukkha, or suffering.
And therein, one engages the practice of giving and taking, reflecting on the equality of all sentient beings, taking their suffering upon oneself, giving one's happiness to them, etc.,
in light of which one aims to give each and every sentient being the same realization of the ultimate truth.
The third part of the aspiration is transforming adversity into the path to awakening.
May the precious Masters grant their blessings so that whatever adversity and suffering may arise, I see them as the wiles of this demon, ego clinging.
and transform them into the path towards awakening.
As it is said, we are individuals who are within the confines of the three realms of samsara.
And if we were to wonder how this came about, initially there is an idea, a conception of an autonomous or independent self.
And then there is an addiction towards that, a grasping at it, and based thereupon action, and based thereupon a result, and there through dissatisfaction and suffering.
So I think it is worthwhile to put some thinking on this kind of I-thing.
I am sure we hear almost every teaching, you talk about this ego clinging and all that.
So when we are born, there is no name, and then we get the name,
then we somehow cling to that name, notion, of all so-and-so is calling me.
And then, slowly, that sort of becomes a bigger and bigger kind of influence into our daily life.
So when I was in Portugal, some of non-Buddhist friends, I actually tried to go to the gym a little bit.
So non-Buddhist friends, they asked me, what's your name?
So the closest name for Ram Jam I could find in Portuguese is Roberto.
He says, oh, I'm Roberto.
And then one day I was doing exercise and I forgot my name was Roberto.
And somebody was calling Roberto, Roberto.
I said, who is this calling?
I cannot associate myself with my name.
So we usually talk about my clothes.
Once there is me, my clothes.
Then my body, my hand.
So we are the owner of this, right?
So if you think a little bit,
Who is this mind?
Normally people will say, oh, it's the mind.
But when it comes to mind, we always say, my mind.
We don't say the I mind.
So, I think we are not really clear about who is me.
So this doesn't need a very deep kind of philosophical studies.
It's just simple thinking.
When you say, my mind.
So outside of mind, there's supposed to be another who owns your mind.
So this kind of analytical thinking is very, very helpful, I think, and I think very important because we consider this I so precious, this so-called I.
So when we so much focus on I, I, I, then everything becomes very big.
Quite often in the teachings it says that if you put a handful of salt in a glass of water, then it becomes not drinkable because it becomes very salty.
So because there is a very small mind focusing on the eye, a similar handful of salt you put in a big bucket of water, then you don't taste the salt so much.
So similarly, instead of just focusing on the eye, this eye, if we can open up our mind a little bit, then all these small problems, all the problems we think are very big, become very small.
So that is, I think, a very good antidote for whenever we face a problem in our life.
If you always sort of search, what is this problem?
What is the cause of this problem?
It always becomes focused to this I.
Some story I used to tell that if you are walking by a shop and there is a beautiful expensive vase in the showroom glass and you walk by and then someone is cleaning the glass and then push the vase and breaks.
So we'll say, oh, such a pity, that beautiful vase is broken.
Now similar, same scenario, now that vase belongs to you.
So now once it belongs to you, then we order the label saying, this is mine.
Then somebody breaks it, then becomes catastrophe.
Isn't it?
So I think many problems in our life are because of this.
We put this sticker of me, me, me everywhere.
I think it is worthwhile to do some analytical thinking whenever we face some problems.
I think one very important thing is, when we face these small, small problems in our daily life, then I think we should
quickly try to implement the teachings, thinking, oh, this is a small problem, just let go.
And then when the big, big sort of circumstances hit us, then we are not ready to challenge or face that.
So small problems, small thing, when it hurts us, then I think we have to work on that.
Example,
When you drive in Europe, I used to drive in Asia, where there's not much rules.
You can more or less do whatever you want.
If you have a bigger car, you can just more or less go.
Just push the small cars away.
But in the West, there are so many rules that in the beginning when I drop, I get so much honk.
Bang!
Bang!
So every time, honk is not a very pleasant feeling.
Because actually they are shouting at you, isn't it?
So even these situations, when you feel a little bit unpleasant feeling, then I think we have to start working on that.
So small, small kind of unpleasant feeling, we have to recognize, okay, this is due to our ego clinging.
And then we get used to kind of dealing with problems.
Right away, we implement that.
So the teachings, teachers like George Kensington used to say,
when the circumstances arise, then that's where you judge whether you are a practitioner or not.
So when everything is fine, when everything is going well, of course we can think, oh, I'm doing good practice.
But when circumstances arise, then if we cannot handle it, then our practice and our kind of life is going different direction.
So whenever some small circumstance arise, we try to implement right away the teachings, especially like the Lojong teachings.
Then we get kind of used to that thing.
And then when sometimes face bigger challenges, we are ready to face those challenges.
And I think if you're a good lojong practitioner, not only sort of able to face those challenges, but you sort of look forward for challenges, isn't it?
Oh, now let me see whether I can handle this kind of harsh world.
or not.
So sort of look forward.
There is no kind of fear that I might face some difficulty and challenge because what you have been trained for that.
Okay?
.
applying the practice throughout one's life.
May the precious masters grant their blessings so that I may focus upon the essence of the practice throughout my life and always apply the five strengths of pure thought and pure deed, gathering merit, purifying obscurations, and making prayers of aspiration.
In the end, I was able to receive a message from the Lord.
I was able to receive a message from the Lord.
I was able to receive a message from the Lord.
I was able to receive a message.
So the practice of mind training should be one that we carry throughout our entire life.
It is not an instruction that we put into practice for a short time and then give up on it thinking that there is something else to do.
Rather, the practice should be completely integrated with our very being and carried throughout the entirety of our lives.
.
.
.
.
.
And it's important that when we make the accumulations of merit, for example, if we go to a temple and we make an offering, perhaps a butter lamp or something, or if we are circumambulating temples, stupas and what have you, it's imperative that when making merit, we always dedicate that merit to the development of bodhicitta within ourselves.
.
.
.
.
.
And within the mind-training tradition there is the resolution of practice.
So we talk of the kind of five
the powers of the practice.
One of them is of the resolution to actually engage or to thoroughly familiarize oneself with the instructions.
So for example, we may take a week, we make sure that we are very mindful in absorbing the teachings within our very being during that time span and thereafter we can perhaps extend it to two weeks and so forth.
The measure of mind training is given thus.
May the precious Masters grant their blessings so that with joyful self-assurance and freedom of mind I may bring all adverse circumstances onto the path and everything may become a remedy to ego clinging.
.
.
.
.
.
And so essentially the measure of mind training is how familiar you are with the practice.
And so when you meet with certain circumstances then the mind training teaching should kick in and then assist you with whatever difficulties or circumstances you are facing.
Thank you.
So I'm a little bit, my mind's gone a little bit blank at the moment, so I can doubly blame COVID and also the flu that I'm suffering from at the moment.
Sometimes we say like, I think it's sort of become habit in Tibetan tradition, like .
So whatever circumstances happens, this kind of .
If you sort of fall, there is a lama chain.
So likewise, I think it has to be a kind of habit.
I tell you a joke.
An occidental Buddhist was flying in the plane and then the plane hit the turbulence and the plane was shaking very badly and he was praying to Guru Rinpoche.
He was praying very hard to Guru Rinpoche and then finally the plane landed safely and he said, oh thank God.
And so no matter what circumstances, negative we face, rather the thing that we should thank is the mind training teaching.
Thank instead of God, the mind training.
So, the Lama said, if you want to go to the forest, you have to go to the forest.
If you want to go to the forest, you have to go to the forest.
As it is said in the mind training tradition, our practice of mind training should be as agile as a good horse rider.
So if you're very good at riding horses, you're very skilled in that endeavor,
Then when you're galloping along a plain or walking gently through a forest, everything is fine.
And then all of a sudden you come upon rough ground, etc.
It makes no difference.
The horse rider is able to ride the horse according to the ground within which he finds himself.
So accordingly, with mind-training teaching, no matter what circumstances we may run into, we should, like a good horse rider, be able to navigate it.
The sixth point then are the commitments of mind training.
Again we read, May the precious masters grant their blessings so that I may keep my promises without hypocrisy and always remain impartial and free of ostentation, guarding the lojung commitments as I do my very life.
Thank you.
So accordingly, as I mentioned before, if we are able to utilize the lojong or the mind training instructions to face small challenges, when the big challenges of life come along, we are prepared.
Accordingly, if we kind of ignore the small challenges of life and perhaps don't apply the mind training instructions there, when the larger challenges of life come along, when circumstances in life change, then we won't be able to deal with them.
It will be a huge difficulty.
So the essence of the commitment is not just to deal with small problems and leave the big ones, rather we should deal with all problems regardless of their size.
Someone I know did some wrongdoings, or maybe he did not really commit a crime, but somehow he was put in a kind of bad situation in prison.
And then he received many teachings, person has received many teachings.
But then he came out after a while and he was so angry at the people who mistreated him, or prison guard or whatever.
He was so angry.
Then I said, yeah, but what about the teachings you receive, the mind training teachings you receive?
What about generating love and compassion?
He said, their behavior is beyond loving compassion.
There is another lady I know from a very noble family.
She works in her father's company, a very rich family.
Because her father made her sign some documents, the father ran away and she was put in prison.
from living like a princess life to a prison with six other ladies, all very wild ladies.
And then I used to send her some books.
She received actually Mahayana teaching and also she had practiced Vajrayana teaching.
And she handled very well.
And she said she was in the jail, she was reading them.
the mind training, it was really helpful that she managed to go through her time.
Because it's not her mistake, it was her father's mistake.
And then she got, because she signed some documents, she was in prison for a few years.
But we could see how she can actually implement the teachings that she received.
So that's how I think we have to handle, we have to implement the teachings.
Also, I heard some time ago that Burmese, everybody knows Burmese Aung San Suu Kyi, she was also raising the enlightened courage when she was in house arrest, and they said, really, help her.
So like that, I think sometimes we have people who you can really see that how much these teachings can benefit their difficult situations.
So that's what the teaching is all about.
So we have received the highest teachings, most profound teachings, then we have difficulty in life, then we are not able to handle and then panic.
Then the teaching is not really helping you.
And I think it's also very important to, especially in the kind of place where there's non-Buddhist people, I think we have to remain very low profile, not showing off, saying, oh, I'm Buddhist and this and that, but outwardly very kind of common, but inwardly big difference, big heart.
I think also we have a responsible, being a Buddhist, responsible to inspire others, right?
Inspire others.
Like sometimes in a family, some of you, maybe not all of them are Buddhists.
When you become Buddhist, if they can see that you've become a better person, you're becoming a more open-minded person, then it will inspire your other family who are not so much into Dharma.
And you become Buddhist and you become crazy, then it's not going to inspire.
We do have quite a number of crazy people, isn't it, in the covenant?
I have a friend who said, before he became Buddhist, he was quite wild, and then he became Buddhist, and then he realized how wild he was before he became Buddhist, how crazy he was.
And then after some time he spent with the Buddhist community, he said, oh, now I realize how crazy the Buddhists are.
And then I said, at the end you will realize how everything is crazy, then you have achieved.
So I think very important to live very low profile, very normal kind of life, unless you are monastric, it's different.
But normal dress, normal, just being very normal, and then be a good person.
And that will encourage our family, friends, saying, oh, this really, I met many people who said that it changed.
Recently, I visited one school in America.
They have a program in the public school.
They don't call it Buddhism, but they call it something like compassion.
And all the public schools, they do some activity related to the compassion.
They're doing some experiment.
Then the teacher is also not Buddhist.
It was an African-American lady.
And they said it helped all the children's behavior using that some technique, karma binding, and little meditation, and then teaching them how to care for others without using the very difficult dharma word.
So they do twice a week, they do training.
And then I asked the teacher, how was it doing?
She said, oh, it's really good.
She said like how the African-American talk.
It's really good.
Not only the kids, but even when the parents, they fight, the kids will come to parents.
So the chain reaction you see from that school, it's in Louisville in America, that they're really seriously thinking how to implement some kind of the Buddhist technique into main education system.
And they have a, they call it control school.
One school, they have twice a week meditation, and one school don't have.
So if they can prove that that school with the meditation can be better than the other school, then they were seriously thinking how to implement this technique method into the American education system.
Because there's a lot of violence going on in America.
So like that, how can the children, little bit of, not very deep Buddhist philosophy teaching, just basic teaching how to be good, how to be caring for others, already they are able to change their parents.
Parents like, because public school, most of the children are from little bit poor background family.
So then there's some lot of violent and things.
So the children's able to change their parents.
So that was very encouraging to see that.
So similarly, we call ourselves Buddhists, and I think we have to, even without talking, just being a good human being, being a good person, will encourage others into the path.
Guidelines for Mind Training?
In short, may the precious Masters grant their blessings so that I might genuinely follow all the guidelines for increasing the two aspects of bodhicitta and within this lifetime gain the realization of the Supreme Vehicle.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
The guidelines is relatively straightforward and so moving on to part three, good in the end.
Dedication.
Through the merit of this heartfelt aspiration to practice the seven points of mind training, the heart essence of the incomparable Joe Atisha and his heirs, may all beings attain the level of perfect awakening.
And so here, it is important to reflect that this particular tradition is the heart essence, we read, of the incomparable Atisha.
It is the Dharma of his activity, if you like.
It is the quintessence of his very being, arranged in seven constituent parts, renowned as the seven points of mind training.
And so here, we are making the aspiration that this particular spiritual instruction become blended with our very being and one with us
.
.
.
And the colophon reads, this one-pointed or single-pointed prayer was made before the precious statue of the glorious Atisha at Kishu Nyatang by Jamin Kinsey Wongpo, a carefree yogin who wanders throughout the land and is extremely devoted to the precious Kadampa tradition.
May the prayer be accomplished.
And the section headings, the outlines, were added by Mangala.
.
.
.
.
.
And so I find it very good to repeat this prayer, the ambrosia of the mind, at the very beginning before engaging in whatever daily commitments and daily practices that you do.
It's wonderful to repeat this at the beginning.
And it doesn't matter what language you use, whether it be in English or whatever language, it makes really no difference.
Because the point of repeating something every day is to bring the meaning to mind.
I think last year, you saw this Dalai Lama visit our Nyingma Mela in Bodh Gaya.
Was it last year?
No, this year.
This year, beginning of His Holiness' visit.
And his advice to that time, he said that, from morning when we get up, then we should make the aspiration prayer that the whole day, this day, whatever we do, we will try to engage with dharma.
So this I found very, very important because we always think that, oh, sometime later I'm going to do something.
We sort of forget today.
So His Holiness' advice was like, when you get up in the morning, then we make a kind of commitment with Thamjad, that whole day, this today, the whole day, I will howl, I will ...
and bring my whole day into the practice of dharma.
So that was his advice during his visit at the beginning of this year in Nyingmabal.
He very kindly visited and stayed maybe one or two hours.
So I think today we are on time.
