In the Buddha, Dharma and the Supreme Assembly, I take refuge until I attain enlightenment.
Through the merit of practicing generosity and so on, may I attain Buddhahood for the benefit of all beings.
In the Buddha, Dharma and the Supreme Assembly, I take refuge until I attain enlightenment.
Through the merit of practicing generosity and so on, may I attain Buddhahood for the benefit of all beings.
In the Buddha, Dharma and the Supreme Assembly, I take refuge until I attain enlightenment.
Through the merit of practicing generosity and so on, may I attain Buddhahood for the benefit of all beings.
May all sentient beings enjoy happiness and the causes of happiness.
Be free from suffering and the causes of suffering.
May they never be separated from the great happiness devoid of suffering.
And may they dwell in the great equanimity that is free from attachment and aversion.
The ground is purified with scented water and strewn with flowers.
It is adorned with Sumeru, the king of mountains, the four quarters of the universe, and the sun and the moon.
Thinking of it as the blessed Buddha fields, I offer it.
By virtue of this offering, may all beings here and now attain the happiness of that pure land.
I implore you, according to the temperament and mental capacity of sentient beings, please turn the wheel of Dharma of all the vehicles, lesser, greater and general,
Thank you.
Thank you for inviting me here today.
And I've never been to this place before, but I came to London with Jyavuji Khen Rinpoche, Thimmo Chan Rinpoche, a very long time ago, when I was eight years old.
That was the first time to England, and after that, I think a few times with Jyavuji Khen Rinpoche, so another Vipassana center.
So it's very nice to have all the masters checking on you.
Makes me a little bit scared also, watching down on you.
And last topic is subject, teaching only four words so it might not take more than
Five seconds.
I was very lucky that I was born to Khyentse Rinpoche's daughter as a grandson.
So from a very young age I was just born
to a family of one of the great masters from Tibet, one of the greatest masters of our century.
So normally in the teachings, we have to, when you look for authentic teacher, there's a lot of things, how to analyze the teacher, the qualities of teacher and finding the teacher,
and checking the teacher from far, from close, from near, and then a lot of kind of process is taught in the teachings.
But I just happened to be born in one of the greatest teachers' family.
I don't have to go through all this process to finding the teacher.
Maybe you don't know, this comic I used to watch, it's called Asterix, and then this guy falls in a magic potion and then he becomes fat.
Maybe you don't know that.
Anyway, doesn't mean I know a lot, doesn't mean I'm a realized person.
doesn't mean I have a lot to share, I have a lot to give.
I just happen to be Rinpoche's grandson, and I happen to see what a great master, what a special spiritual master looks like, and how they teach, and how they are so kind to people.
And Khense Rinpoche, being a student of
Both of them belong to the Khyentse lineage.
Both of them are the reincarnation of the first Jaman Khyentse Wangpo, one of the founders of the Rimé tradition in Tibet, which is a non-sectarian tradition.
The Khyentse is the founder of the non-sectarian tradition.
So therefore, Khyentse Rinpoche has a connection with many spiritual masters,
I think it's hardly we can find any spiritual master who is not somehow connected with Khyentse Rinpoche.
So that is one very, very great quality among many, many special qualities.
So being so loved and cared by Khyentse Rinpoche and then many great teachers also being very, very kind to me.
So I took a great opportunity.
to meet all those great masters.
So Khyentse Rinpoche, Tengku Khyentse Rinpoche, also, how he become what he is, how he become what he is.
Also, he was, Tengku Khyentse Rinpoche was, he was born to a noble family,
and very devoted to Dharma, one of the main benefactors of Jamyang Mipham Rinpoche.
So many of you might know one of the greatest Tibetan scholars.
So when Khenchen Rinpoche was born to this family, actually many lamas want to recognize Khenchen Rinpoche as their reincarnation of their teacher.
So, but Khenchen Rinpoche's father wanted Khenchen Rinpoche to continue his family legacy.
So he doesn't want to accept that his son is going to become a spiritual master, not carry on the family legacy.
So he said, of course, not to the lamas, but he told anybody, because their tongue is quite powerful, one of those kinds of laws, even in the English.
Anybody who says my son is a reincarnation of a Lama, I'm going to whip them a hundred times.
So people didn't dare to say, talk much.
So one of his, one of Khyentse Rinpoche's father's root guru is also Sheshing Gyaltsab Rinpoche.
We have so many names, so I try to minimize the names instead of confusing you.
So one of the teachers, Sheshing Gyaltsab, so he really
have faith in Shichin Gyaltsab.
So Geshe-la Rinpoche said, OK, now he is reincarnation of Kensei, so you must let him practice dharma, join the monastery.
Then he also not easily, he didn't let Kensei go easily.
He said, I need a proof, kind of proof that he is reincarnation.
So until Geshe-la Rinpoche really told him how he knew he was reincarnation, his father would not accept.
So Geshe-la Rinpoche said, last night one of the protector came, I think particularly Tsering Ma, belongs to Longchengyin tradition, protector came and told me personally that he will benefit the Dharma, so we have to let him go.
But still father a little bit hesitant and so I don't want to go into so detail, but then Geshe-la Rinpoche had an accident and he
He almost died, and then they did a divination council with many, many teachers, and everybody says, if you don't let him be what he is, he will not live, because he's not born to work as a, to carry on your family legacy.
So the father, before Kenser Rinpoche recover from the accident, he start putting the dharma robes, dharma robes on him, and he said, okay, now, now I'll let you go.
So like that.
So then he let Khenchen Rinpoche go, and then Khenchen Rinpoche met with him.
He went to see his teacher, Sheshing Gyaltsang Rinpoche.
And that time, Tsongsak Khyentse, previous Tsongsak Khyentse, was also studying.
So they sort of studied together with Sheshing Gyaltsang Rinpoche.
So how he became what he is, is that
Rinpoche, one condition, one condition was that Rinpoche had a very, very good tutor, that is his elder brother, who was also a great practitioner, very knowledgeable.
So he knew which lama, which teacher to go and see, which teacher to go to see, which teacher, because at that time there were many great masters living there, so he took to the right teacher.
That is one, I think, reason.
Then second reason,
There's many of these teachers, the great teachers, who think that Khyentse Rinpoche is the reincarnation of their teacher.
So they're very, very happy to give any teaching that he requests, really like special attention to Khyentse Rinpoche.
So that's also one privilege.
Privilege, right?
One of the reasons.
And then, I think another thing is that
The family is quite well off and supportive of Dharma.
So whenever Rinpoche wants to go and receive teachings or study with Lamas, they always support him with sending grains, Sambha and all those supportings.
So Rinpoche had all his family support for him to do that.
Then on top of that, his own kind of determination.
He studied with so many different teachers.
He used to say he has like 50 different teachers from all different schools.
And together he spent like 20 years in retreat practice.
So all those conditions together, then you can say he became who he is.
So it's not kind of a title that you say, okay, you are a high Lama and he suddenly becomes high Lama.
is not like that.
I think even to become Khenchen Rinpoche and how he became he is, it's a great example for us that is in a path how we have to progress to get to some kind of higher realization.
So in Khenchen Rinpoche's case, there are many, many circumstances that came together which became what he is.
So then there are a lot of stories or signs of his accomplishment in Tibet.
So a few of these stories that I'd like to share.
Because there's only four words, so I better add some stories.
If you look at all his writings, what we have just now is like 25 volumes of his writings.
That is knowledge, from that we can learn, which is knowledge.
And then spending 20 years in retreat, from that we can know how much practice he has done.
And relying upon 50 different teachers,
and how much he sort of received teachings, and he received almost all kind of lineage, non-stop.
And then teachings that he get, the big, big teachings, which takes about six months to give the whole cycle, so he gave them three times, and then
The works he has done since he came out of Tibet, the building monasteries, reprinting books.
So it looks like one man lived many lives, many lives.
If you look at his works, he did nothing but writing books.
If you look at his teachings, he did nothing but giving teachings.
If you look at his practice, he did nothing but practice.
So like many kind of people's kind of work in one.
So, all those things put together, then it becomes what he is.
Then some of the stories were quite funny.
That one time, Kensar Rinpoche was in Tibet.
He was invited by a nomad compass, eastern Tibet.
They are a little bit like American wild west cowboy, cowboy style.
They like to carry guns and ride horse and were,
gun, hat, and like that.
So the guns, guns is very important for them, very treasure.
So one family have a very special gun.
Everybody knows about this gun.
So one day, Khense Rinpoche came to his tent, yak hair tent, and Rinpoche, Khense Rinpoche asked, is this your famous gun that's hanging on the door?
And they said, yes.
And we just took the,
what you call barrel and blow on it, blow blast it and then went.
Then Rinpoche left.
And after that, his gun could never hit anymore.
Always missed the target.
So this story became quite famous.
So whenever Rinpoche went, everybody hide guns.
So there are many signs of his accomplishment like that.
And so those are the kind of signs of accomplishment.
And I think one thing in the story that I heard is Rinpoche's last meeting with his teacher, Nongsek Khyentse Rinpoche, was in Tibet and after Nongsek Khyentse came to Sikkim and Khyentse Rinpoche came later.
So Rinpoche never met him after Tibet.
And Rinpoche, sort of, after leaving his home, coming to India, and then passing away of his teacher, and I think Rinpoche felt like sort of hopeless, kind of, hopeless, hopeless situation.
And I heard that
which is sort of like got sick, and some of the photos you can see very, very thin, sort of not much kind of hope for the Buddha Dharma.
Of course, there's nothing much in which he cares, nothing more than the Buddha Dharma.
So, seeing teacher passing away, kind of no hope.
And then he came to India, and he met one person who's very close with Drona Sakyamuni.
And Rinpoche talked with him, and how did Tsongsakense Rinpoche passed away, all that.
And then he told a story to Rinpoche that he met Tsongsakense Shukla Rinpoche before he passed away.
And Tsongsakense Shukla Rinpoche was bedridden, sick in bed, bedridden, bedridden.
And then he went, and then he sort of cried in front of Tsongsakense.
And Kenji Rinpoche looked at him and said, why are you crying?
He said, well, now,
we all came to no land, came outside of Tibet.
And many lamas passed away, and now you are in this situation.
And I feel that now there is no hope for Tibetan Buddhism or Buddha Dharma.
And Shakyamuni Buddha told him that, don't worry, I heard Tibetan Buddha made it to Bhutan, he will take care of the Dharma.
So Swamiji told him that.
So when this guy told Kenser Rinpoche this story, then Kenser Rinpoche realized that Swamiji put fully trust or hope on him.
Then he started taking medicine and then he got better.
I think then onwards he started non-stop giving teachings till he died.
Non-stop giving teachings.
And I think we can say that nowadays in this world, thanks to Khyentse Rinpoche and like Khyentse Rinpoche, that we still, in the Nyingma Kagyu tradition, we still have the lineages, unbroken lineages from Tibet.
So that we can still enjoy these teachings and all that.
So I'm trying to find what to say because there's only one.
So I'm trying to describe Lama.
So like that.
So when you see really like a grandmaster like many of these Tibetan grandmasters who came from Tibet are like that.
Kenzo Rinpoche.
I'm talking about Kenzo Rinpoche because I'm more close to Rinpoche.
And I know about Rinpoche.
So many of them.
such a great master.
So you spend time with him and you be with him and then somehow you somehow feel kind of natural devotion.
In my case, first a kind loving grandfather and slowly
turn into my spiritual teacher, Transakshin.
Because then I studied a little bit, learned a little bit about the quality of the teachers, and how to rely upon the teachers.
Then Genser Rinpoche sort of, from kind, loving grandfather to my teacher.
So Genser Rinpoche is not only spiritually guiding me, but very, very kind, very kind.
My grandmother was a little bit strict.
So it's a good cop, bad cop.
Maybe not a good example.
Okay, so like that.
So I think of course any teaching or any tradition that even general knowledge we have to rely upon the teacher to learn how to read, how to write.
And then especially when you go into practicing Dharma, then teacher becomes a very important role.
And then from Sutrayana, Mahayana, then Vajrayana, a different teacher plays a different role in your practice.
Oh, you're supposed to translate for me.
I'm speaking English.
OK.
Sort of carried away a little bit.
It's a COVID.
So rely upon a kind of really authentic, special master.
It's very important to get deeper into practice.
because we cannot navigate a sailboat by reading a book or learning how to sail just by watching YouTube or something like that.
So you really need a kind of person-to-person instruction on how to navigate the boat or fly a helicopter just by reading manuals.
We cannot do that.
So I think in the spiritual path,
I think we must rely upon an authentic and good teacher.
And then how to find an authentic good teacher?
There is many kinds of instruction taught in the teachings, Sutra, Mahayana, Vajrayana, all teaching emphasize a lot on finding authentic master and teacher.
So one reason why we have mostly
the Tibetan masters here, I think it's because in Tibet, since Buddha Dharma came into Tibet, then I think, I think last time also I said earlier, that the one main kind of purpose of the whole Tibet country was to bring the authentic Dharma into Tibet, where else other countries
focus on development, outer world, development of architecture, all this focus outside.
But in Tibet, our great Tibetan things, around 7th century, all the resources of their country is to bring the authentic Dharma into Tibet.
And there's not any kind of teaching they find in India, but they really went through filtering system to get the real authentic.
And then once they came to Tibet,
And there's many ways of checking whether it is authentic or not.
So they really tried to get a fine, like gold, by beating, by melting it, trying to get it pure.
So that was the whole nation's kind of main purpose was to bring the Tibetan into Tibet.
And then preserving it by, more or less, they say, like 20% of the Tibetan population is focused on preserving that.
20% of the population, Tibetan population, I think we can say monks and nuns, their main focus is to kind of practice and meditate.
So that out of which then comes those great masters.
So it's not something that runs on Tibetan genes.
I don't think it's something to do with Tibetan genes.
It's the circumstances and the situations.
we have one of the best authentic masters.
So, it's like, I sometimes compare like, I shouldn't say Brazil because now we are in England.
So, England, maybe out of all the population in love with football, we have 12 best top players.
Usually I say Brazil because it's a bigger population.
But now I think it's better, say, English football players out of the whole population interested in football, then 12 top players, and compete in the World Cup.
So if we have a meditation World Cup, I'm sure the top Tibetan lamas will win the gold cup.
So that's how they preserve the tradition and then bring it down.
Bring it down, keep it till now, and then
we can rely upon on their teachings.
So Lama Majjheta Tsova Thop.
So especially if we are, I think these four lines, we can kind of correspond to the Sutrayana, Mahayana and Vajrayana level.
So Lama Majjheta Tsova Thop, I think, in order to, of course, every level of the
path we need to rely upon a teacher.
But especially when it comes to the higher tantra or Vajrayana practice, then master plays a very, very important role.
And it is more of how you can receive the authentic teacher.
Especially like Vajrayana empowerment or something,
Then if we are able to see the teacher as an Arhat, then in the Vajrayana teaching it says you receive the blessing from Arhat.
Then if you perceive teacher as a Bodhisattva, then you receive blessing of Bodhisattva.
If you can develop your mind and see the teacher like a Buddha or Guru Rinpoche, then you receive blessing from Guru Rinpoche.
So therefore, when it comes to the Vajrayana practice, then the spiritual master or root teacher becomes very very important role.
So Guru is calling you.
It is said that the compassion, the heartfelt compassion of a spiritual teacher is all-pervasive, like the rays of the sun.
So the rays of the sun, as you know, they are open to all.
However, you have to step into them to receive their warmth.
If you were to remain in the shadows, then even though the light or warmth of the sun is all around you, you'll remain away, absent from it.
So if two things come together, one, as I mentioned then, is the all-pervasive and compassionate warmth of the qualified teacher's blessing.
And if the disciple is open to that, steps out of the shadows into the warmth of that embrace,
Then the two of these things coming together, the compassion of the teacher and the faith or devotion of the disciple, then can cause a spiritual realization to be born.
Today in the Kamsotha,
Relying on the teacher and seeing the teacher as Buddha, it's not Dāna to try to create favor with the teacher.
You're not doing the teacher a favor by seeing them in that way.
Rather, the point of it is to train your own mind, is to subdue your unruly mind.
That's why the teaching is given.
That's why one views the teacher in such a way.
Today, I don't consider myself as a teacher, but I always, people who somehow connect with me and some people who somehow want to receive some of the lineage of Khyentse Rinpoche, then I always tell them that your source of inspiration or Tsavel Lama or Root Guru, just consider those who come to me, I always say, think of Thimotsen Rinpoche.
as you are kind of a spiritual Guru.
That was English.
This happens a lot since Covid.
So now with the modern technology we can see the video, we can hear his voice, we can see how he looks like,
You can see how he smiles.
Then by reading his biography, thinking about him, then we really feel kind of strong kind of devotion.
Even physically, not with us, I think his spiritual energy is very much, very much always there.
So I always encourage them that me as I'm kind of like intimate in between, you know,
mediator.
So, sort of, since now we need human to transfer, we cannot now use AI to give the artificial intelligence to give the teachings.
So, we still use Zoom sometimes for loom.
So, I'm sort of in between, to transmit like rituals or Wang, when Vajrayana empowerment or Wang, I'm there to sort of
intimate in between, but you should consider like the Rochans Rinpoche as your teacher.
So I tell them, those who come to me, and the same thing with other schools, I think we can do that.
Some people who are inspired by Toghuja Rinpoche, listen to his teachings, watch his videos and all that, and Nushikha Rinpoche, Chakravarti Rinpoche, same thing I think.
They are like really enlightened,
really really enlightened, I'm not sort of making it up, being with them, sitting with them, they're physically no more with us, then we can still kind of feel strong devotion and longing to become like them.
Then they're teaching lineage or some wang or some rituals, then there's some students like myself and of course I'm the maybe
but there are many other students of Kenzo Rinpoche who are very much alive.
And then you see the lineage from them, and then consider Kenzo Rinpoche as teaching master, a source for inspiration.
So that's, I think, is very much possible.
And if we can develop like that, and then during Wang, during the empowerment, I always say, tell them that visualize now Vajramaster somehow plays an important role in the Wang.
So visualize me as Kenzo Rinpoche.
and imagine that you're receiving the blessing from Khenjir Rinpoche, directly from him.
So, Lama Majjhitaatu Sovata, then that is how we can really inspire Khenjir Rinpoche or your teacher, spiritual teacher.
Time to time, I think it's very good to remind, because the teacher represents the Dharma.
When you think of teacher, you think nothing but his teachings.
Something else like
If you had fun with some friend in a normal life, when you think of that friend, you remember the fun moment.
So here, when you think of a teacher, then you think of his teaching.
Lama Majjhepati Svarupa.
Don't try to remember again.
There is some kind of Tibetan custom that some senior lamas, out of nothing, suddenly they'll say,
I remember Guru Rinpoche, which is very nice, beautiful.
We used to tease one Lama every time he would say, Oh, Jin Jin.
And we used to tease him a lot.
He stopped saying it.
And then we feel very bad that we made him stop that.
So I think it has to be kind of, it has to be like part of your thing.
In certain circumstances, if something arises, Oh, Jin Jin.
I can tell a joke, no?
So there was a Western Buddhist, Western European whose background raised in Christian kind of environment and became Buddhist.
So then he was flying in the plane and then suddenly the plane went through a very turbulent situation and he is praying to Buddha, Guru Rinpoche, Guru Rinpoche, Guru Rinpoche, Buddha, Buddha, Buddha, Buddha.
and then landed safely.
And he said, thank God.
Just to wake you up.
So now, I think the outer Lama, I'm talking a lot about outer Lama, outer Lama.
The reason, main reason why
We have to rely upon the outer Lama.
The ultimate Lama is none other than your own Buddha nature within you.
Without reliance on the outer conventional Lama, then the ultimate Lama, the nature of one's mind, cannot be revealed or realized.
Until you recognize the ultimate nature of your mind, the inner Lama, then it's imperative to rely upon the outer conventional Lama.
offering salutation and prostration to him, singing his praises, making offerings and so forth, receiving teachings and putting them into practice.
The sole purpose of this is to then realize the inner Buddha nature.
Having realized the ultimate inner nature, the inner Lama, if you will, then there is no need to continually rely upon the outer Lama any longer.
Why?
Because the job is done.
He's introduced you to the inner Lama and you've recognized your own Buddha nature, the inner Lama.
So the second line of our four lines, do not let your mind be distracted, look into its very essence.
So this points then to the ultimate nature of spiritual or meditation practice.
The ultimate nature, the Buddha nature is introduced and then having received that introduction or that instruction then one
applies it to oneself, one digests it if you like, such that it becomes a part of who we are.
And so, when we think of ourselves, we're a composite of body, speech, and mind.
And so that much, in a way, is obvious.
And of the three, mind is that which is important, particularly for spiritual practice.
As Kevji Dujunmohse used to say,
From one perspective, the Dhamma is quite difficult to practice because one needs to gather many things together and one needs to learn a lot and do a lot, so to speak.
From another angle, it's really quite easy because it's all to do with the mind.
So as we read here, do not let your mind be distracted.
So when we are attempting to practice meditation, the difficulty we face is distraction, isn't it?
So when we talk about continuing, or strengthening, deepening, if you will, meditation practice, it's imperative not to be distracted by the objects that are proper to us through the six senses, the five sense consciousness, consciousnesses and the mental consciousness.
But rather to, as opposed to looking outwardly, rather one should look within, look at the essence of experience or essence of the of the mind and remain with that.
In the past, we used to go to the temple to pray, but now we don't go to the temple to pray.
We go to the temple to pray, but we don't go to the temple to pray.
We go to the temple to pray, but we don't go to the temple to pray.
We go to the temple to pray, but we don't go to the temple to pray.
And so to continually investigate the nature of one's mind, to look, as we read, into its very essence, this will then deliver us the result of spiritual practice, the understanding of the ultimate, if you will.
However, if we neglect this practice and we continually, for example, recite prayers, mantras, such as the six-syllable Om Mani Padme Hum mantra, et cetera, in a way, we're given to distraction and not much benefit is going to come of that.
For the real practice is to be devoid of distraction.
And so, if we think of ourselves as a kind of Buddhist practitioner, and we go to the temple, and perhaps we sit in the meditation room, we recite kind of prayers and mantras and so forth,
Do we actually stop and sit in meditation?
This is a big question, isn't it?
Here it's imperative to actually stop the distraction of doing something externally and look within and abide within the nature.
At that time, when we meditate, we can talk of meditation session and then a post meditation session.
during the post-meditation session, which for the majority of us is considerably longer than the actual meditation session, it's important to continually check your mind, to look within and to look at the nature of thoughts and emotions, the experiences of life, if you will.
And the more familiar one becomes with this, the shorter the gap between the meditation session and the post-meditation session, until the two merge.
For example, if you go to Rangsema, Rangyong, or Rangotu, you will find that there is a place called Tongbo.
In Tajikistan, there is a place called Semchi.
In Semchi, there is a place called Ngojun.
In Mayang, there is a place called Jundu.
In Mayang, there is a place called Jongyong.
In Semchi, there is a place called Yangne, and in Yangtuk, there is a place called Kanangtuk.
And in Rangbute, there is a place called Lennar.
Do not let your mind be distracted.
Look into its very nature.
This is a very profound instruction.
These are very high words.
Really, to understand their meaning, one should receive guidance on meditation or semchit from one's teacher, leading to an introduction to the nature, or awakened, if you will, nature of mind.
Having received those introductions, it's imperative to
digest them well such that one isn't distracted but continues to maintain one's nature that which has been introduced and the more that one becomes familiar with this practice the less one will be given to distraction.
So the first two lines, do not forget the guru, pray to him at all times, do not let your mind be distracted, look into its very essence.
We can say that these constitute the path of mantra, or secret mantra, tantra, if you will.
Now the third line, do not forget death, let it spur you on to the Dharma.
Here, the mention is made of the nature of a conventional life, if you will, and is brought up so as to induce a sense of renunciation.
As such, we could say that this third line belongs to what we might call the Theravada or Hinayana, if you will, tradition.
The word that we translate as renunciation
really means a desire to definitely emerge, to definitely emerge from samsara or contaminated existence.
And for that to happen, one needs to reflect upon the nature of contaminated existence or samsara.
If one does so, then naturally a wish to leave or to emerge from that situation will arise within us.
Without such an understanding of the nature of things, conventional nature of things, then a desire to leave it will not arise that easily.
So if we look around us, we look at the environment within which we find ourselves, and we look at the sentient beings living
within said environment, none of them are going to remain forever.
Everything, down to its molecular makeup, is in the nature of change.
That's when we think that everything is in the nature of change.
Impermanence means not permanent, doesn't it?
In the nature of change.
When we think of experience,
We are going to experience that which is impermanent.
As such, it's not going to allow us any permanent or enduring satisfaction.
And this is the meaning of dukkha, which is often translated as suffering.
When we think about life,
Here, it is imperative to think of what is really useful, because if we look at our life, is there any lasting or enduring benefit to anything we do?
If we reflect on this point again and again, we'll see that it's not really worth our time.
And thereby, we come to see that life in and of itself cannot give us any lasting or enduring satisfaction.
As such, it's empty of enduring essence, if you will.
With that understanding, then it spurs us on to Dharma practice.
I'm not sure.
here, do not forget death.
Why?
Let this contemplation spur you on to the Dharma.
So the point of remembering impermanence and death is not a morbid fantasy, but rather the point of it is to avoid procrastination.
Because when we think of our own Dharma practice, more often than not, we've given in
We give in to procrastination.
I can't do something today, so perhaps I'll put it off.
I'll do it tomorrow, or the next day, or next week, when I have the time, funds, etc.
Here we're continually putting off, thinking that we have ample time to do something later, when that's not necessarily the case.
So, for example, when we think of riding a horse, if we would like the horse to go quickly, we use the whip.
And the whip then makes the horse go faster, gallop faster.
So similarly, we should use the reflection on impermanence and death to spur on or to enhance or speed up, if you like, our efforts at putting the Dharma into practice.
And the last line, do not forget sentient beings.
With compassion, dedicate your merit to them and make prayers of aspiration.
So we're reminded in the last line, which kind of epitomizes the greater vehicle or the Mahayana teachings, we're reminded not to forget sentient beings, but rather to reflect upon them and their plight, their nature, if you will.
Without remembering the kindness of sentient beings, there's very little chance we'll give rise to the wish to awaken for their benefit or bodhicitta.
Accordingly, one should recall sentient beings continually, recall their kindness to us.
Indeed, we can utilize the various meditation techniques of reflecting on how each and every sentient being has, at some point or another, had the experience of being a kind parent to us.
To recall that kindness, wish to repay it, meditating on love, compassion, and so forth.
So when we begin Dharma practice, we are reminded not to forget sentient beings.
So we kind of remind ourselves, I'm not going to do whatever practice or what have you that I'm about to embark on for myself alone.
Rather, I'm going to do this with an altruistic attitude that encompasses all sentient beings and such for the sake of all sentient beings, I'm going to do whatever practice we're about to embark on.
So with compassion we read, dedicate your merit to them.
So here compassion.
Compassion for whom?
For all sentient beings, oneself included of course.
Here, when we reflect upon oneself and all other sentient beings, we all are pretty much the same, in that we would like to have happiness and avoid discomfort or suffering.
This is the lot for everybody.
And if we notice, when we look around us, we'll find that each and every being
Each and every sentient being is looking for happiness and that's why they are going here and there, doing this and that, trying to find some comfort with the hope that it will endure.
Nobody rushes here or there with the hope of suffering now, do they?
Happiness or peace or bliss, if you like.
There's a variety of types, but the most sublime comes through the practice of the Dharma.
We think about the Dharma then.
hearing about it, contemplating it, and ultimately then putting it into practice.
Putting it into practice then has the effect of subduing the unruly mind.
Through the absolute subjugation of the unruly mind, one achieves then the level of the state of liberation.
This then is the spiritual path.
So when you think of others going out of their way to engage in practices that they hope will bring about their kind of peace and well-being, but are actually what we call erroneous paths.
Paths in the sense that they're not going to bring about this ultimate happiness, but rather bring about that which they are trying to avoid, of the same, more dissatisfaction.
So we are all interconnected in some ways.
And so when we think about achieving liberation for oneself alone, one can't really break this connection.
We can understand this when we think about our experiences of life.
Any kind of happiness or comfort involves others.
When we think about ourselves,
When we were born, we didn't even have a name.
Our name was given to us by somebody else.
Then we were kind of clothed.
Again, the clothes were given to us by somebody else.
It's not as if we kind of had them packed up and we brought them with us.
And we think about it.
Where we might find ourselves, for example, here we are in a hall.
The hall was built by other people.
We didn't build it.
As such, when we reflect that there is no way that we can have any experience completely devoid of involvement of another, then it helps us in opening our mind towards others.
Accordingly, if we reflect upon past and future lives, in particular past lives, a life previous to this one, one previous to that, etc., then we know we can chase this back indefinitely.
And during all those different lives, we had parents.
Accordingly, when we equate the two, we could say, as mentioned, that there is not a single individual who has not at one time or another had the experience of being a kind parent to us.
Accordingly, with compassion, dedicate your merit to those sentient beings and make prayers of aspiration.
So when we engage in positive actions and we dedicate that merit, we should dedicate it then for the welfare of all.
And so within these four lines, we find the quintessence of what we might call the Hinayana, Mahayana, and Vajrayana.
In the past, when we were young, we used to go to the temple.
When we were older, we used to go to the temple to pray.
We used to go to the temple to pray.
We used to go to the temple to pray.
We used to go to the temple to pray.
We used to go to the temple to pray.
We used to go to the temple to pray.
So if we look at the three lines once again.
Do not forget death, let it spur you on to the Dharma.
Through reflecting upon death and impermanence, we'll develop a sense of renunciation.
Seeing the essencelessness of things will then spur us on to Dharma practice.
Now this Dharma practice is not really something that one can do for oneself alone.
As such, we read in the last line, do not forget sentient beings with compassion.
Dedicate your merit to them and make prayers of aspiration.
This includes then the quintessence of the Mahayana or Greater Vehicle Path to awaken for the benefit of all sentient beings.
As such, one engages in practice with this extreme of altruism, the wish to awaken for the benefit of all sentient beings.
And not being complacent, one then seeks out a spiritual teacher.
Do not forget the guru, then we read.
Pray to him at all times.
And from this individual, we receive the quintessence of the Dharma, the Vajrayana, the kind of instructions.
Having received them, putting them into practice, then we read,
Do not let your mind be distracted.
Look into its very essence.
Hereby, we are able, upon this instruction, to engage the swift path.
The swift path here, then, is the one which brings one's unruly mind quickly under control.
As such, if one is without distraction, there is no longer an unruly mind.
One has recognized its essence.
And here, essentially, then, we are practicing the heart of the Dharma.
Because, as the Buddha himself has said, all the teaching of the Buddha is to subdue the unruly mind.
This is my teaching.
Based thereupon, we find a variety of spiritual vehicles or methods, ways, if you will, of subduing the mind, based, respectively, on the practice of individual liberation, of the greater vehicle, and the Vādamāntaya Vajrayāna.
In the past, when I was young, I used to go to school to learn how to read and write.
When I grew up, I learned how to read and write.
When I grew up, I learned how to read and write.
When I grew up, I learned how to read and write.
When I grew up, I learned how to read and write.
So when we think of the way Buddhism was presented in the noble land of India, we find the approach of the three spiritual kind of vehicles, the lesser or the vows of the vehicle of individual liberation, the greater vehicle, the Advaita or Vajrayana vehicle.
When this was imported into Tibet, we find different times and different translations, et cetera, which resulted in the four kind of traditions, Nyingma, Agyu, Sakya, Gelug, and so forth.
When we look at all of these different externals, one should understand that they all have the same purpose, which is to subdue the unruly mind.
When we think of the unruly mind, there are various ways to divide the different types of disturbing emotions that we all experience.
Primarily, we can talk about hatred, desirous attachment or addiction, and confusion.
And as such, then we have the various kind of practices to subdue them.
And also then there is the extraordinary method to subdue them with one kind of swift blow, if you will.
Accordingly, the Buddha then gave 84,000 different types of teaching.
The reason for this was to address the unruly mind, such as addiction, aversion, pride, jealousy, confusion, and so forth.
And so each spiritual tradition has its unique way of presenting the path.
So for us, in Nyingma tradition, we speak of nine spiritual vehicles, or yanas.
But if you don't have the ability to do it, you can't do it.
You can't do it.
You can't do it.
You can't do it.
You can't do it.
You can't do it.
You can't do it.
So if we look at these nine jhanas, the first one is the vehicle of the shravakas, or hearers.
And primarily, their method, or way, or type, if you will, of meditation is a reflection of the Four Noble Truths.
So understanding the truth of the dukkha, understanding its origin, and the wish to abandon that through the implementation of a path which leads to its cessation.
So here, then, we talk of,
suffering, understanding the origin of suffering, wishing to bring about its cessation, and implying the path or method that will bring about that cessation, the Four-Level Truths.
The second is the vehicle of the solitary realisers or Pratyekabuddhas,
which in terms of their principle meditation is the reflection on the 12 links of mutual dependence going in a kind of terms of the depiction clockwise and in a reversed way in order to kind of end to see how one enters into cyclic existence and how one can emerge from that or reverse that if you will.
This leads us then to the third vehicle which is of the Mahayana
and within the Mahayana having given rise to the attitude of bodhichitta one engages then in the six perfect actions which result in the state of awakening.
In this part of the Mahayana, it is said that Chiva, Chivata, Mambas, Chajju, Chujju, Lhasa, Lhasa, Gomiya, Lhasa, Gomiya, Lhasa, Gomiya, Lhasa, Gomiya, Lhasa, Gomiya, Lhasa, Gomiya, Lhasa, Gomiya, Lhasa, Gomiya, Lhasa, Gomiya, Lhasa, Gomiya, Lhasa, Gomiya, Lhasa, Gomiya, Lhasa, Gomiya, Lhasa, Gomiya, Lhasa, Gomiya, Lhasa, Gomiya, Lhasa, Gomiya, Lhasa, Gomiya, Lhasa, Gomiya, Lh
And then we leave the Sutrayana and we go to the Vajrayana.
So here the Vajrayana
there are six practices or six spiritual vehicles.
The first three, action, performance and yoga, are what we can generally call outer tantra.
And then there are the three inner tantras.
With regard to the first three then,
There are the ways of meditation where one brings to mind the meditational deity in front of oneself and one makes offerings and so forth.
And the example here is of oneself as a supplicant and the Buddha in front of one granting a spiritual kind of blessing or spiritual boons, if you will.
Thereafter, one progresses through the practice becoming equal to the meditational deity.
and this then, or the Buddha if you will, and this then leads to the inner tantra which is subdivided into three groups of Maha, Anu and Ati yoga respectively.
So when we think of the practice of Maha Yoga, the principal meditation is creation phase yoga.
With regard to Anu Yoga, the principal practice is a completion phase with characteristics.
And for them, the last, Ati Yoga, and that is a completion phase without characteristics.
So here, there is a gradation, a kind of a gradual path by which the one single aspirant practices so as to deepen their experience.
And so we can continue to talk about each of these spiritual vehicles, but if we were to boil them down to their very essence, what we find here is the Heart Advice in four lines.
this four-line aspiration, prayer or supplication, if you will, contains the quintessence of the entire Buddhadharma.
For example, when we think about a creation phase practice or sadhana practice, if you like, we have the Lama, we have trust in the Lama.
The Lama gives us empowerment and we thereby are introduced to the Yidam deity.
When we meditate upon the Yidam deity, the Yidam deity isn't separate from the Lama.
The two are indivisible.
So by having trust in the Lama, one is meditating upon the Lama as indivisible from the meditation deity.
And that is the path.
And the very painful spiritual path is Atiyoga, the Great Perfection, Zopa Shambho.
For this, the Lama introduces the awakened nature to the student.
through receiving that introduction, then one begins to kind of digest it, to recognize that which has been introduced.
And this is then the very pinnacle of the practice, which is kind of essentialized in the second line.
So when we think about the practice of Atiyoga, it seems very simple, doesn't it?
The nature is introduced, and then you simply recognize that, and you are Buddha.
But here, in order for that recognition to occur, there has to have been, on the side of the supplement or the practitioner,
an inconceivable amount of purification of previously engaged negative actions, and the accumulation of an inconceivable amount of positive potential or merit.
For without this, no matter how many introductions are made, a recognition will not occur.
And so the point of all of these spiritual practices is to bring the student to a certain level of spiritual maturity
to make them ready for this introduction.
And the introduction itself doesn't have to be particularly elaborate.
Neither does it have to be from a text or involving a ritual at all.
I'm sure you're familiar with the story of Batur Rinpoche introducing the nature of mind to his disciple, Wushu Lundok.
At the time, they were lying on their backs, and Batur Rinpoche said,
Do you see the stars in the sky?"
Lungong replied, yes.
He said, do you hear the dogs barking below?
He said, yes.
He said, that's his mind.
And at that point, because of his prior training, he recognized the nature of mind that had been introduced, that was introduced.
So inshallah also, London day also, trip naal yaad maan rudhikaam, tabarish, mind the gap, Saint Ross.
So for those of you who take the tube, then you'll know the expression, mind the gap, right?
I don't know how to explain better.
So I think that's it.
What?
Does it do that?
Okay.
Okay, so little kind of
comedy joke finish so thank you very much through this note may all beings attain the omniscient state of enlightenment and conquer the enemy of false and delusion may they all be liberated from this ocean of samsara and from its pounding waves of birth old age sickness and
Just as the Bodhisattva Manjushri attained omniscience and Samantabhadra too, all these merits now I dedicate to train and follow in their footsteps.
As all the victorious Buddhas of past, present and future praise dedication as supreme, so now I too dedicate all these sources of merit of mine for all beings to perfect good actions.
Prayer for the long life of Digno Khyentse II of Session, Urgyen Tenzing Jigme Lundrup.
Om Svati.
Through the compassion of the infinite Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, and the blessing of wondrous Gurus, Devas and Dakinis, the beloved Master Khyentse, treasure of knowledge and love, has manifested his matchless compassion, just as all have wished.
Fearless holder of the teachings of the Lord of Urgyen,
and of the non-partisan tradition of sutras and tantras, all-victorious one, let your life be forever firm and indestructible, and accomplish spontaneously and without effort your vision of present happiness and ultimate bliss.
Prayer for the long life of Shetanarath Jamyonposhche.
The tradition of Samantabhadra and Padmakara is the great perfection in Sogpachempo.
For its teachings you are a brilliant sun beyond compare, infinite in your wisdom.
Peerless great lion of the Dharma, of teaching and practice, may your secret body, speech and mind remain steadfast and indestructible.
A great drum to invoke compassion, a prayer for Sogyal Rinpoche's swift rebirth.
Vajradhara, sixth lord endowed with eight special powers, Avalokiteshvara and Tara sublime, lotus-born Buddha, great treasure revealers and your heirs, to you all we pray.
Think of us this very instant.
The merit you gathered so completely is like a brilliant lotus flower, its heart adorned with a lineage that matures and liberates and resplendent on a vast ocean of instructions.
You that raised the victory banner of Buddhist teachings, to you we pray.
Though you have the power to teach Dharma in all kinds of ways, you saw no way to bring further benefit at a time such as this.
You chose instead to seek the tranquility of Samadhi and let your vibrant wisdom mind enter the still forest of the Dharmadhatu.
But for all those who are drawn to what is profound and vast, we pray that you return swiftly, a youthful sun, a supreme emanation, with a thousand rays of light bringing teachings for this time, the divine and sacred 84,000 teachings of Dharma.
And when you return in a form to match your predecessor, Tertön, a Lord of Siddhas, adorned with all the beauty of a perfect life of liberation,
May you ripen into a splendor to behold, a vision for the eyes of thousands of receptive and fortunate disciples.
The prayer in six Vajra lines.
Embodiment of Buddhas of past, present and future, Guru Rinpoche, master of all siddhis, guru of great bliss, dispeller of all obstacles, wrathful subjugator of Maras,
To you I pray, inspire me with your blessing, so that outer, inner and secret obstacles are dispelled, and all my aspirations are spontaneously fulfilled.
Aum Ma Hum Ben Sa Guru Pema Siddhi Hum.
Prayer for the tradition of Guru Padmasambhava.
May the living tradition of Guru Padmasambhava, Bodhisattva Shantarakshita, and the Dharma King, Sri Sanderson, spread throughout the world in all directions.
May the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha be present in the minds of all, inseparably at all times, bringing peace, happiness, and well-being.
Ramesh, I firstly would like to extend my thanks to all of the volunteers who have helped make this evening possible.
So I just wanted to thank all of the stewards, to the folks who work in the shop, reception, the wonderful team behind the audiovisual desk, the attendants, the organizing team, and the administration and registration team, without which we wouldn't be able to do this.
So thank you to all of the volunteers.
Thank you.
Rinpoche, you spoke with warmth of your master, Dilga Khyentse Rinpoche, your kind, loving grandfather who became your spiritual teacher.
You talked with clarity, urging us to digest the instructions in order for our mind not to be distracted.
that we might recognize change and death and have a desire to emerge swiftly from samsara while not forgetting the kindness of sentient beings.
In order to do that, your teaching this evening has reminded us that we must rely on an authentic spiritual master, a source of inspiration, the representation of the Dharma.
To that end, we pray that, unlike the guns you spoke of, may your teachings always hit the target.
And of all the top football players in England, dare I say you embody not only the goalkeeper, the defence, the midfield and the striker.
Thank God.
Rinpoche, we pray for your happiness and good health.
May all of your aspirations and good works come to full fruition.
Yours is a kind and direct voice which is very, very necessary.
We urge you to remain a close friend of Rigpa.
Return to London soon and bless us again with your presence and your teachings.
We would also like to thank the Venerable Sean for your eloquent and warm translation.
On behalf of all of us here, we offer you our thanks and gratitude for this wonderful evening of teaching.
Thank you.
